Title: Spaced Repetition Promotes Efficient and
Effective Learning: Policy Implications for
Instruction

Abstract:
Concern that students in the United States are less proficient in mathematics, science, and reading than their peers in other countries has led some to question whether American students spend enough time in school. Instead of debating the amount of time that should be spent in school (and on schoolwork), this article addresses how the available instructional time might be optimally utilized via the scheduling of review or practice. Hundreds of studies in cognitive and educational psychology have demonstrated that spacing out repeated encounters with the material over time produces superior long-term learning, compared with repetitions that are massed together. Also, incorporating tests into spaced practice amplifies the benefits. Spaced review or practice enhances diverse forms of learning, including memory, problem solving, and generalization to new situations. Spaced practice is a feasible and cost-effective way to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of learning, and has tremendous potential to improve educational outcomes. The article also discusses barriers to adopting spaced practice, recent developments, and their possible implications.

Keywords:
research-based instructional strategies, spaced/distributed practice, testing, learning, education

Tweet:
For durable learning, space out your review of the material
over time; back-to-back repetitions are ineffective.

Key Points:
• The timing or arrangement of review/practice affects learning.
• Practice is more effective when spaced out over time, instead of massed or grouped together (equating total practice time).
• Spaced practice enhances memory, problem solving, and transfer of learning to new contexts.
• Spaced practice offers great potential for improving students’ educational outcomes.

Introduction:
Every few years, when the results of international assessments of students’ mathematics, science, and reading proficiency (e.g., Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study, Programme for International Student Assessment) are released, there is renewed consternation that American students lag behind their peers in other countries. Many factors have been proposed to explain the differences in educational outcomes among participating countries, including cultural attitudestoward education (e.g., Jensen, Hunter, Sonnemann, & Burns,2012; Pearson, 2012). One question debated in the UnitedStates for decades is whether children spend enough time inschool (Barrett, 1990). Although the number of school days peryear for American children is relatively low, compared to manyother countries, in terms of total instruction hours from primarythrough lower secondary education, the United States ranksamong the highest (Organisation for Economic Co-operationand Development, 2014). What counts as official instructiontime, however, varies across countries (and across states withinthe United States). Also, whether the time is used as intended(for teaching, as opposed to performing administrative or class-room management tasks) and how much additional time isspent on schoolwork outside of school (e.g., homework, after-school tutoring) clearly do matter as well.
Independent of whether sufficient time is devoted to aca-demics (both inside and outside of school), another perhapsmore tractable issue (and the focus of this article) is how instructional activities are scheduled. Within the availabletime, can instruction and related learning activities bearranged in a manner that is optimal for learning? Put differ-ently, is student learning affected by the timing of academicactivities? A large body of research from cognitive and edu-cational psychology suggests an affirmative answer to bothquestions. Repeated encounters with to-be-learned materialthat are spaced out in time (as opposed to recurring back-to-back) are an effective way to foster learning that is long last-ing. Incorporating spaced repetitions into existing educationalpractice is feasible and has great potential to produce gains tolearning without requiring added resources (time or money).

The Spacing Effect:
Most people know from personal experience that if one istrying to learn something well—be it a set of facts, concepts,skills, or procedures—a single exposure is usually inade-quate for good long-term retention. We are all familiar withthe adage “practice makes perfect.” But what is less obviousis that the timing of the practice (when it occurs) matters agreat deal: Having the initial study and subsequent review orpractice be spaced out over time generally leads to superiorlearning than having the repetition(s) occur in close temporalsuccession (with total study time kept equal in both cases).This phenomenon is called the spacing effect (sometimesalso referred to as the benefit of distributed practice) andwas first observed by researchers over a century ago(Ebbinghaus, 1885/1913). Since that time, literally hundredsof experiments by cognitive psychologists have demon-strated the advantage of spaced/distributed over massedpractice (Cepeda, Pashler, Vul, Wixted, & Rohrer, 2006), anda recent comprehensive review of the utility of various learn-ing strategies awarded distributed practice one of the highestratings based on the available research evidence (Dunlosky,Rawson, Marsh, Nathan, & Willingham, 2013). Figure 1shows a commonly used design for studying the spacingeffect when there is a single review opportunity.

Spaced Practice Benefits Memory
Probably the most robust effects of spacing occur in improvedrote memory for the studied material. Across 254 studiescomparing massed versus spaced practice on later memoryfor verbal information (e.g., words, sentences, facts, pas-sages), overall, spaced practice dominated massed practicein recall performance (Cepeda et al., 2006). In one earlystudy, to illustrate a specific instance, college students wereasked to learn the Athenian Oath (Gordon, 1925). One groupof students heard the oath read 6 times in a row; anothergroup heard the oath 3 times on 1 day and 3 more times 3days later. The students recalled as much as they couldimmediately after hearing the oath for the sixth time andagain 4 weeks later. On the immediate test, the group that

received massed repetition recalled slightly more than thegroup that received spaced repetition. But on the delayed test4 weeks later, the spaced group clearly outperformed themassed group. While massed practice might appear moreeffective than spaced practice in the short term, spaced prac-tice produces durable long-term learning (see Rawson &Kintsch, 2005, for similar findings regarding rereading oftext passages on immediate vs. delayed recall).A number of theories may explain the benefit of spacedpractice for long-term retention (Toppino & Gerbier, 2014).According to one prominent theory, repeating an item poten-tially reminds the learner of its prior occurrence, whichprompts retrieving the previous presentation of the item, aprocess that enhances memory (e.g., Wahlheim, Maddox, &Jacoby, 2014; the next section elaborates on the effects ofretrieving from memory). Massed repetition eliminates theretrieval process—there is no need to retrieve from memorybecause the same item was just presented. Another theoryemphasizes the study/learning context (i.e., what surroundsan event, from the external environment to an individual’smental state). With spaced repetitions, the context that getsencoded in memory with each presentation of an item islikely to be more variable (compared with massed repetitionsthat are close together in time and context); the variable con-texts that are stored in memory then serve as more effectivecues for subsequent retrieval of the item (e.g., Glenberg,1979). Deficient processing of massed repetitions is yetanother theory. When a current item is the same as one thatwas just presented, the redundancy reduces attention (e.g.,Magliero, 1983). The different theories are not mutuallyexclusive, and multiple mechanisms may act in concert toyield the memory advantage produced by spaced practice.Few would argue that memorizing instructional content,so as to be able to reproduce the information verbatim frommemory, is the ultimate goal of education. Nonetheless,acquiring foundational knowledge and being able to quicklyaccess relevant information from memory are often prerequi-sites for higher order learning and reasoning. For instance,remembering arithmetic facts (e.g., times table) is a criticalpart of mathematical skill learning, and a transition from cal-culation to direct memory retrieval of the answer allowsmore efficient problem solving (e.g., Siegler, 1988). Spaced practice promotes not only accurate recall of multiplication facts in children (Rea & Modigliani, 1985) but also faster retrieval of target responses (Rickard, Lau, & Pashler, 2008). Also, possessing adequate prior knowledge can facilitate subsequent learning and comprehension (e.g., Kalyuga, 2007; Mayer, 1977). In short, spaced practice can improve students’ memory for essential facts and concepts, which in turn facilitates more complex learning and problem solving.

